suppose you were enrolling at a
university
to study the chinese language and
somebody takes you aside to have a
private conversation about the professor
in charge of the program and they tell
you
he's a good man not that he's a nice guy
not that they like him but that he's
morally
ethically a good man
i don't know how you'd feel having that
conversation but
i would be wondering why are you telling
me this
is there something else that's wrong
with this university
or wrong with this program is there
some reason why you would forewarn me
or claim that this professor is a good
man
now one of the reasons for this being
hey i came here to learn chinese this
professor may be a completely
despicable unethical character but i'm
really fundamentally interested in
whether or not he
can guide me through the steps and
stages hold my hand as we go through the
language exercises to take me from being
unable to speak the chinese language to
being fluent in the chinese language
in four years right like that's that's
what i'm here for
you go to a mechanic trying to fix your
car and you're not
in this way interested in the moral
character
of the mechanic you're interested in
whether or not he is a good mechanic
not whether or not he's a good man and
if someone took you aside and told you
that this was a very moral or even a
very politically
correct garage where you were getting
your car repaired
i don't know how you feel about that but
i would raise an eyebrow and start to
wonder
what's going on here why am i being in
this way
forewarned about the moral character
of the people involved now there could
be other reasons it could be that
someone was telling you this but a
university professor
because there's recently been a scandal
at the university
because there's recently been some
problem because there were some other
professors
you should really watch out for maybe
there are other professors who are
engaged
in bribery and corruption scandals maybe
there are other professors who are
molesting or sexual exploiting their
students or something maybe there is
some particular reason why you're being
told this
but i for one respond to that kind of
statement with apprehension
now why is it
that so many of our political discourses
in the 21st century about sex and sex
workers
begin with precisely these sorts of
moral
declinations moral
moral depositions moral
moral apologetics for the character
of the prostitutes themselves
all right i'm very apprehensive about
the whole
political discourse and of course it
very often comes from people who
themselves have spent no time with
who don't know personally on a
face-to-face basis
prostitutes and if you do happen to meet
one prostitute is of an upstanding
moral character they are very likely to
have a conversation with you in which
they complain
about how immoral many of their
colleagues are and they may regale you
with stories and anecdotes about how
terrible
other people in the industry are and
that's why i opened
this video with the parallelism to the
strange demi-monde of professors and
people with phds
if you get to know those people even if
the particular person you're talking to
is not an incredibly immoral person very
likely
the first topic of conversation is going
to be them complaining about their
colleagues
complaining about their own superiors
about other professors complaining about
the moral turpitude
of the field that they're they're a part
of all right now i think there actually
are profound reasons as to why in
western english-speaking academia
you meet such extraordinarily immoral
characters
right in the universities but it
deserves to be asked also
what is it we as students or clients
for the system of education are
demanding um
when i take a look even at a professor
teaching politics
teaching the politics and history of
china for example
i may really just be interested in
whether or not they're a good teacher
and it is not unusual to find a
professor
here in the west who does a good job
shall we say
of teaching the history and politics of
china while themselves personally
holding a totally immoral political
position
while for example being supporters of
the communist party of china
like they take their duty to teach
students about the failures of the
community the communist party of china
seriously
but at the same time they're actually
personally morally committed
to supporting the communist person you
can meet
deeply deeply morally compromised
characters like that
in every field of academic endeavor and
research that i've ever been in contact
with
buddhist studies cambodian studies
political science and so many
in so many different different fields
right
so this problem is uh not unique
to our political questioning of the
future of sex work
in the western world right the way we
think about the problem
is constrained by the solution
we're often already committed to right
and most people
on the moderate left are now committed
to
legalizing normalizing mainstreaming sex
work so that sex work and future will
become a job
just like any other job or if we can't
say it's exactly the same as
any other job so that it will become a
job
that is no more ods than
modeling or exotic dancing that it will
be at least
accepted into mainstream society in that
way and they will become tax-paying
law-abiding citizens uh in most western
countries
now i've received email from different
people with different perspectives on
this
uh question including women who had some
kind of experience
uh as sex workers or as strippers
or something like that something
adjacent to sex work you know she always
say
but yesterday for the first time i got
an email from
a physically disabled man and from his
email
it seems to me he's quite seriously
disabled
and he said he related to some things i
said in a recent youtube video where i
talked about the fact that there are
disabled people who are not able to
participate in romance dating the
competitive culture
of finding a partner and ultimately
in some cases reproducing and so on and
he said he really related to really
appreciated what i was saying and
reflecting the fact that there are such
people for whom their only choice is
either to live in
celibacy and isolation or to accept the
moral compromise of becoming clients
in the sex working you know industry and
he says that he himself has never done
this
however two very interesting points one
he has met
sex workers who do regularly have
disabled people as their clients
and who became involved with political
advocacy
for the disabled that's quite
interesting so they're
they're physically and intellectually
able people who because of their
repeated experience getting to know
physically disabled people stronger than
actually get involved with the politics
of
disability and presumably government
programs related disability whatever so
that's
already interesting and he said he's met
some of these sex workers in that
political context not that he was a
client not that he was
having sex with them and so he came to
have respect for them
and start to ask questions about the
political potential
of sex workers to transform our society
okay
interesting and he also says that
although he doesn't feel
he's uh committed to one side or the
other of this argument
he is thinking that there are ethical
implications for himself
and should he one day you know become in
the same way a client
for sex workers in the presence of our
times if he should himself become
you know uh a john right
now look it would be
ludicrous to sit here and generalize
about the ethical character of people
who become
professors in our university system
it is also completely necessary and
inevitable
right that in giving an analysis of
what's wrong with the university system
and how to reform it how to improve it
that we indulge in those kinds of
generalizations
right of course each of us will at some
point
have met somebody with a phd who was a
good
person and who maybe was a good person
in some really
important ways right you can't design
a social system or even a social service
around the assumption that the employees
will be angels you have to design
social service to work with and for the
absolute
worst aspects of human nature so when i
hear these political programs that begin
by praising the moral character of
prostitutes
and again there will be particular
prostitutes who are extraordinary
intellectuals
apparently he's met some who are
interested in social and political
causes and who have various redeeming
qualities right we ask okay
are there no prostitutes at all who are
drug addicts
none are there no prostitutes who become
prostitutes
because of drug addiction in order to
pay for drug addiction
are there no prostitutes at all who are
vain
or who are lazy right again even talking
to
strippers and people who do only fans
and webcam shows and this kind of thing
people around the edges people who are
sex workers to some extent
many of them will talk about the ego
trip
how it makes them feel how it makes them
feel powerful so and so forth right
and then beyond this um
you know why are university professors
evil
in the particular way that they are so
often
of course you have to look at the
structure of authority
in the university system the type of
power
those professors feel over students the
type of powerlessness
they may feel in relation to the
institution as a whole and the the
process and the product
of the service that they're providing
right
now prostitutes
aren't just paid to have sex
they're paid to tolerate the company
of the clients who want to have sex with
them right they're paid to be
flattering and of course in the context
of bdsm
they may be paid to be cruel or to play
a character or act out a scenario
but in any case they are paid to indulge
the desires
and fantasies of their clients and it
deserves to be said
that even people with extraordinary
redeeming qualities
people who are extraordinarily
intellectual
intelligent people were extraordinarily
ethical and upstanding right
they will gain a very different
perspective on the world
right by being employed as prostitutes
for however many years right so he's
mentioned
i don't even know if it's just one sex
worker but he's met obviously didn't
meet hundreds
of sex workers involved in this kind of
political advocacy i don't know if it's
one or two or a dozen
or whatever right okay so those those
female
sex workers right they have a certain
perspective
on the disabled community that you're
talking about
right but if you just stop and think
about it don't you think there are many
many aspects of that community
and that political problem that they're
necessarily blinded to
right there's a certain type of
interaction they're going to have with
their clients
in some ways their clients are going to
be pretending to be
someone they're not right and in some
ways the prostitutes themselves for the
purposes of that
interaction are going to be pretending
to be someone they're not
and i am not saying this to single out
or dehumanize prostitutes in any way
because i would say exactly the same
thing about university professors
right how many university professors
truly
know or can relate to or understand
what their students are going through
right and how many students even ever
tell the professors it is
extraordinarily rare for a student
to even sit down and tell the professor
what the problem with the course is and
i know i've both been the professor
receiving those complaints
and i've been the student you know
delivering them i've and i've been
married to a professor we're now
divorced you know i've been involved in
different
uh aspects and facets of this puzzle for
many decades of my
my life now um right
this kind of professional
blindness professional bias
right that comes from the position of a
professor in society
okay i think we have to admit bluntly
that for even the most erudite and
ethical prostitute
there's going to be a type of a type of
blindness you know that's
much greater and runs much deeper okay
now um
i think it's a really interesting
question to ask
what is the political potential
of sex workers to transform our society
we
mostly discuss the potential of our
society sort of the fox populi
in general collectively to change the
status
of sex workers right now
uh 2021 and the last few months
of 2020 the sex workers of thailand
got really organized and started
demanding
new political rights as never before now
one of the reasons for that is there's a
generalized revolutionary miasma
in thailand right now and the
prostitutes i think
correctly see that there's the potential
for the writing of a new constitution
or amendments to their current
constitution
and they are saying look we don't want
to operate in a legal loophole anymore
we don't want to operate in a gray area
like from the constitution forward like
in the most basic fundamental law
we want clear black and white legal
distinctions about
what's legal and what isn't and what our
profession is how it fits into thai
society
if you've never been to thailand let me
just ask the question is there anywhere
in that country
where you are not assaulted by
prostitutes
on a on a daily basis maybe that was a
humble brag on my part
i mean i'm i'm not hideously ugly but
you know
when i say assaulted by prostitutes it
can include them running up and
grabbing your crotch or trying to like
you know i've had prostitutes
literally assault me in that sense where
they're they they want the business and
i'm like
remember i was like no no i'm a scholar
of buddhism or whatever
i can admit i never said i'm a scholar
of buddhism because i think that
wouldn't
i think that wouldn't have deterred them
maybe they would have tried oh well
if you're a scholar of buddhism you
really need our services
my famous line i would just say uh in la
ocean i would say me paul dale
which is i have enough already totally
untrue
but i would never make them break up
laughing and they leave them that
realize i didn't i wasn't a potential
client
but anyway i just say the percentage of
the economy that is
sex workers and related services in
thailand is staggeringly high
it's ubiquitous it's everywhere and sure
there is an interesting question here of
them stepping forward
and demanding uh their political rights
all right
now this is also an example of if you
like
revolution from above the left-wing
perspective
paradoxically is to insist that the sex
workers are the proletariat of our
society and they're not
they're not the poor they're not the
downtrodden i'm going to sketch this out
briefly for thailand
but what i'm about to say would be
equally true of a small town
in canada or in most of the united
states
um you know the typical scenario is
you have a small town in isan isan is
northeastern thailand
and the prettiest girls that everyone
went to high school with
when they finish high school go away to
the big city
maybe openly saying that they're going
to become prostitutes maybe
saying that they're going to try their
luck becoming a singer
a model an entertainer an actress for
some of this like maybe that's what they
tell their
parents or tell their friends oh and
they don't necessarily go away to
bangkok
they could go to another city like
chiang mai they could also go to a small
holiday town on the coast where there
are foreigners as tourists but they'll
go to some place where prostitution is
more highly paid than in their hometown
there will be plenty of prostitution in
their hometown and
you know within weeks
they've made more money than their
parents made in like the last 10 years
like they've made so much money in a
short period of time
they come back at the next major holiday
and they buy a new truck
for their father you know this is sorry
this has been studied this is not merely
an anecdotal phenomenon
where the amount of money made by these
young women and there's a difference in
the cost of living too they come from a
small town in nissan in the northeast
and then they're going to the the big
city or to a holiday resort town
and the amount of money they're making
has prostitutes in a short period of
time there
compared to the cost of living on their
parents rice farm
right and as you can imagine in many
families
not all but most the parents who might
at first be apprehensive
or horrified that their daughter has
become a prostitute
they are in their way corrupted because
their daughter is suddenly bringing home
so much money or so many gifts this
seems to open up you know
and of course there sometimes are lies
involved the daughter may continue lying
and say that they're making this money
as a singer or dancer or karaoke singer
or something that may make up some job
but i think in most cases in thai
culture
it's overt enough uh everybody knows
you know what's going on and where the
where the money comes from
now that pattern doesn't end at that
stage i always insist on this when i was
doing social science research
in southeast asia i would always say you
must
do full life cycle analysis
some of these women were prostitutes for
five years you know they were
prostitutes from 18 years old until
their mid-20s or something
they got a stack of money and then what
right
they go on through a series of other
careers they eventually have children
and eventually retire and become elderly
the very geography of these towns in
northeastern thailand could see this in
southern laos too in some places i
remember talking about this
you had this phenomenon of very
good-looking middle-aged women
who owned the local hotels who owned the
local restaurants and
sometimes like hardware stores right and
you know like you go into a hardware
store you think
oh that's not the kind of woman i
expected to own the hardware store
you know and she's a woman who's wearing
high heels and stuff she's just not
saying no woman would ever want her
hardware but she's like oh you don't
this seems like a woman who reads vogue
magazine or something like you don't see
and this is the next stage of that
pattern that they built up a lot of
money
and again it may be that they bought the
hardware store for their brother
or for their father or for their uncle
right there's there's so much money that
comes in
you get a pattern that plays out and you
you do get this phenomenon
of prostitutes becoming almost lords of
the land
you know throughout thailand so the
discourse about
the prostitutes being the poor and
downtrodden in the earth
stands in stark contrast to
the young women who see this happen with
a sort of
talented tenth of their classmates it's
a uniquely american
political expression you know some
percentage of the prettiest girls
are swept into a life of uh
infamy and fortune you know and of
course some of them go on to marry
wealthy men or marry
white guys from america and australia
they're all these other aspects you know
to the phenomenon
and there are the girls who are not
pretty enough or are
exceedingly moral enough that they
stayed in that small town
and worked on that rice farm and
continued earning
you know pennies per month while this
person was making
you know hundreds of dollars per month
and there is intense
resentment and intense hatred um
you know it creates a very interesting
set of conflicts at every
level of society now i would say i think
currently this pattern isn't so
widespread in canada
but i remember i knew a guy who was from
uh the small town of prince george
and he said for prince george for this
particular small town's belief enough he
said in his whole high school
there was one uh good-looking girl there
was really only one very beautiful girl
in the high school
and everyone was kind of watching
wondering what's going to happen with
her
and she went away to become a stripper
in the big city
and then likewise i mean strippers if
you're in a high-end club can make
ludicrous amounts of money
here and you know so this pattern
can play out uh in the decking and west
i also mentioned this to my girlfriend
in totally different conversation a few
weeks ago
but i remember once saw an interview
with a particular stripper who
typical she was an american american
citizen she had she finished university
with
over a hundred thousand dollars in debt
which is typical united states a huge
amount of debt at the end of university
and she earned all of that money back by
stripping she started stripping the day
she finished university
i forget it was six months or eight
months or something she'd pay off her
student it was just ridiculous how much
money she made how quickly
uh as a stripper when she when she
switched lanes and went into that trade
so you know if you're asking
seriously about the potential of sex
workers to transform
society you are talking about a
very peculiar privileged money money
delete
okay in thailand and laos
i can tell you there are strippers who
own
there are prostitutes there are former
prostitutes
who own hotels who own businesses who
kept that money there is a constituency
of people
uh with serious amounts of money and
serious amounts of privilege to put into
political lobbying
and transforming society uh here and now
and the young women who've just started
still the amount of money they make you
know month by month
may be enough that they can change the
world and these are people
with a very different perspective on
society
i can say well then university
professors right these are women who
will know
firsthand for example the damage that's
being done to our society by drugs
and drug addiction now that doesn't lend
itself to just one political conclusion
probably there are some sex workers who
feel that drugs should be decriminalized
because it seems to them that everyone's
doing cocaine anyway so why don't they
agree with cocaine
and there will probably be some sex
workers who will be able to say that
they've seen the damage done
by drugs like cocaine and heroin and
that we need to be much more serious
about eradicating it from sight it's not
there's not one simple set of political
conclusions to cover this but yes i mean
this
question points to a future in which
the normalization and mainstreaming of
prostitutes
will at least lead to prostitutes being
patrons
for the political class that are more
than ever
guiding and informing and lobbying on
political outcomes right and there is
the possibility of what
we see in thailand right now that
prostitutes
could be you know dissident radicals
really fundamentally trying to transform
and change society
and here's the most interesting part of
it when you look at the young men
who've gotten rich in the oil industry
i mean here in canada it's probably true
around the world but i'll just use
canada for the example
when you look at or talk to young men
who got rich
pumping oil out of the ground to make it
into gasoline
i don't mean olive oil i don't mean
other kinds of cooking oil
right um almost universally
they get involved in politics trying to
justify
the evils of their own industry and
trying to perpetuate their industry
and with the implicit or explicit
conclusion
that the world would be a better place
if only more young men
could be like them and go straight out
of high school straight out of college
to get into oil industry and make their
fortune and
pump gas to keep that keep the trucks
and trains running
any of those guys would be happy to
answer the question look
would you want your own son would you
want your own grandson would you want
your own brother
to quit their job and go get a degree in
mineral mineral oil studies and start
working this they say yes
i'd be proud to be happy if my own son
or grandstand
starts hauling chain or a laying pipe
on an all side they have no problem with
that okay
the thing is about prostitution right we
can all put on this song and dance
we can all pretend that ethically it's
no different from being a university
professor or pumping oil on an oil rig
we can keep on pretending for as long as
it's convenient for us but when you talk
to these prostitutes if you ask them
would you want your own daughter to
follow in your footsteps
okay would you want your own cousin
would you want your own sister
would you want your own mother you know
some of them probably have mothers who
could come out of retirement
and go would you want your own mother to
start doing this the same thing
you're doing okay for the vast majority
of sex workers
if they can be honest with you i think
it is safe to say
for the vast majority the answer is
no and if you look at the places in your
society
whether this is thailand or amsterdam or
paris or berlin
many of the places where prostitution is
flourishing legally or illegally
or you look at uh you know
nevada las vegas nevada right if you ask
prostitutes you know if you have a kid
in the future
would you want to raise your kid here
would you want to raise your kid in this
neighborhood in this part of society
that's dominated by prostitution or
prostitution is a visible
open industry the vast majority are
gonna say no
and they're probably gonna follow up i
explain to you that they're exactly
saving up their money right now or
they've already bought a house somewhere
else that's not
not in that kind of neighborhood for
that reason that even though they work
there and earn their money there
and and then if you say okay how much of
the map
how much of our society in this way
should be dominated
by prostitution do you think society is
becoming a better and better place
if we become more and more like thailand
where
you know increasingly every inch of
every city
is dominated by or tainted by her in the
shadow of
the sex industry this way right would
you want
more and more of america to look like
the brothels
of las vegas it's not a perfect image
frankly
because the way prostitution is you know
the way prostitution is regulated in las
vegas is kind of another complicated
story to get into okay how much of our
society do you want to look like
the prostitution districts of bangkok
thailand
or for that matter tokyo japan you know
where the whole neighborhood
is is it good for our society for this
to be occupying more and more
of the plug space more and more of the
the economy and more and more of the
horizon
of future possibilities for each and
every young woman
who at the time she finishes high school
is good looking enough
to make a living by doing nothing more
and nothing less
you know than selling her ass
different people are going to come to
different conclusions about this
but it's not the case that all sex
workers
are going to be committed to lying
on behalf of their industry in the same
way that we're
accustomed to seeing oil and gas workers
or
executives in the cigarette industry
lying on behalf
of that industry the question of how
really
our society can progress with a balance
between
short-term selfish private
personal gain and what is in the
larger scale long-term interest of
society as a whole
that's a problem that's never going to
go away all right but i say this
whether you are this young man who is
disabled and wondering whether or not he
could or should make this
moral compromise to start sleeping with
sex workers or whether you're a young
woman who's thinking about the
easy money and in some ways more
exciting lifestyle of becoming a
prostitute yourself
right step one
of becoming a politically sophisticated
person
is to admit to yourself and really
reckon with
that what is in your personal
self-interest what is for your advantage
is not necessarily for the benefit of
society
and that on the contrary most of the
time
or often enough you're going to have to
recognize that what is good
for you is bad for other people
that even if you personally could
benefit through prostitution
either as a customer or as a purveyor
right whether you personally could
benefit from
gambling or many other things right well
you have to recognize
turning our whole society into a brothel
turning our whole society into a casino
okay
this would not be for the benefit
of society as a whole